
--- Creating New Programs --------------------------
There are a couple of key things to remember when creating programs that will use
the TM Productions linker libraries:

- The project MUST link with the Multithreaded Linker Library in Release mode,
and Multithreaded Debug Linker Library in Debug mode.  If you do not do this, you
will get linker errors about functions be redefined in LIBC or similar.

- You must ensure that any linker library projects that must be linked with this
program are dependencies of your main project, else they won't be linked or compiled
when your program is compiled.

- You must be sure that you have the nessesary configurations for the platform and
mode (debug or release) that you are compiling for.  See the file on converting AXP
to and from X86 projects for more information.  If this is not set up correctly, you
may encounter a series of liner errors.

- For Lightwave plug-ins, you must include the appropriate Lightwave header files
(including Lightwave_SDK_CPP_Wrappers will do generally cover this), have a
ServerRecord filled out (or ServerName, ServerClass and Active() function), and have
all functions that are passes as pointers to Lightwave declared as extern "C".  You
must also be sure to link with server.lib and serv_w.obj, or your plug-in won't be
recognized as on when added to Lightwave.  The plug-in should be compiled as a DLL
and end in .p.

- For convience, I place executables in a single directory, sorted by platform and
configuration.  To do this, simply change the Output Path in the Link tab of the
Project Settings to point to Bin/<platform>/<config>/<program>.  Do NOT use absolute
paths; rather add the apropriate number of ../'s to the begining of the path to go
back enough directories to create a relative path to the Bin directory.  This is a
bit of a pain to setup, but I find it more convenient once it is.

